# NEH Final Grant Proposal
Child Labor in Mexico 2000 to Present
## Table of Contents
1. Participants
2. Narrative
   * Enhancing the Humanities
   * Environmental Scan
   * History of the Project
   * Work Plan
   * Final Products and Disseminations
3. Biographies
4. Appendices
## Participants
  My lead programmer on this project is going to be Ethan Marcotte. He specializes in web pages "beyond just the desktop", and created "responsive web design", which is what I'm looking for. I want my website to make people think and to intrigue and to encourage people to look further into the topic of child labor, and I think Ethan could help me do that. Having created this idea of "responsive web design", Ethan is the most qualified to help me enhance my website the furthest.
  
  The second programmer I would like to employ to work on my grant's website is Chris Coyier, who specializes in Cascade Styling Sheet programming. Also known as CSS programming, this type of programming is responsible for the actual design of the site; like the color scheme, the layout, and visual effects. In my opinion, hiring Chris would allow for the best outcome when it comes to the beauty and elegance of my website. He too, created the idea of CSS and would be the most qualified individual in doing this work.
  
  I, of course, would be acting as a supervisor, or director. I would be responsible for making sure the project is finished in a timely manner, along with making sure that there are enough funds to completely pay for my project. As director, I would be supervising Ethan and Chris, making sure every detail of my site is exactly how I'd like it to be. I also will be responsible for presenting my project to the board of directors and the public, as well as explaining the project and the goals I would like to accomplish in the future.
## Narrative
#### Enhancing the Humanities
  I think the best way to begin this project is with a spatial map, which would give my audience an idea of the physical locations I am describing. Using GPS coordinates, I would plug them into a program that would physically mark the location on a map. This spatial map will be the base for my whole project.
  
  Also, using a networking program, like RStudio, to create a network, which would allow me to show the connections between the various GPS locations marked by the spatial map. For my first network, I would connect the nodes, representing factories, by edges representing common owners. My second network would be a combination of the spatial map and the network. I would use my nodes to represent factories still, however, I would use the edges to represent the selling of products. This network, when laid out geospatially (on a map), would stretch from Mexico to the United States.
  
#### Environmental Scan
  For my project, I would like to draw on many different features from a few different digital projects. One of these projects being *Photogrammar*, because I like the timeline feature on the map. Since my data will be tracking the number of factories convicted of using child labor over 18 years, I would like to be able to use a program that would allow me to physically show that data changing. The timeline feature would be perfect to do so, as a user can drag the timeline to a specific timeframe or specific year, and see which factories were convicted that specific year.
  
  Another project I would like to draw off of is *American Panorama*, which used mapping data, and had an interesting feature where users had the ability to click on specific points and information about the selected point would appear. I would like to use this feature on my own map. On my map specifically, the "points" would be factories, and users would be able to select any point of their choosing, which would cause an information box to appear. This information box would include an image of the factory, the date it was found to be using child labor, who the owner was at that time, a description of the product produced and sold there, and the number of child laborers found working at the factory.
  
  After being shown a tutorial on how to use the map, users would be given free exploration on the site I created. One tab will say "Spatial Map", a second tab will say "Network" and the final tab will say "Network Geospatially Mapped". Under the "Network" tab, those same factories (or points on the map) would be shown in a network. Each edge would be indicative of relation between the two nodes its connecting. For example, if one owner has owned three different factories that were found to use child labor, all three of those nodes would be connected to the same "owner" node. If one of owner one's factories was also owned by owner three, then that factory would have two edges coming from it, connecting it to owner one and to owner three. Using the network will allow users to draw more conclusions about owners and factories and see if there are any outstanding communities created. The second network would be under the tab titled "Network Geospatially Mapped". Users would be given the option to lay the network out geospatially or just view the network as a network, not on a map. If the user selects "geospatially" then a map of the United States and Mexico will be shown, along with the network layered above it. For both networks, users would be able to click on the different nodes of the network and information about each of the nodes would pop up. For example, if node 6 is selected, then information about the factory represented by node 6 would be included in the information box that appears once the node is selected.
  
  This project is important for a variety of reasons. The most important reason being because young children are not able to consent to dangerous work, especially work in factories. Children are losing their lives due to unsafe working conditions, and there is nothing being done to fight for the rights of the children. Also, this project is important because it will raise awareness. This project would expose the public to the truth about child labor, and that even though it is not a pressing matter in America, it is a problem for those just over the border.
#### History of the Project
  Child labor had been occurring as early as the 19th century, due to Industrialization. In the United States, there have been strict laws enacted to prevent the use of child labor. However, our neighbor at the border, Mexico, has done little to protect the children. Mexico is a great place to start this project simply because in the United States, the laws created forbidding child labor are enforced strictly, whereas in Mexico, these laws have been created, but have not been enforced as thoroughly. Many children, as many as 882,000 between ages 5-13, have slipped through the cracks. To make matters worse, these children are legally employed, and nothing is being done. The main goal for this project is to raise awareness about this problem, which is occurring all over the world. A secondary goal, after raising awareness, is that the awareness created by this project will lead to change. Whether it be the United States interfering to help, or Mexico more strictly enforcing its child labor laws, my hope is that change will occur, and children can be protected. This project is the first of its kind, attempting to combat child labor through technological means. Using technology to physically show people just how often this heinous offense is occurring, and just how close it is to the United States. Also, using technology makes it more accessible to the public, so that there is growing awareness, and hopefully change someday.
#### Work Plan
  As a level II grant, I will be requesting $100,000 to support this project. I would like to use up to $70,000 building my website, plus paying for the resources needed to create the computer program for the network, plus paying for the actual creation of the network and spatial map previously described. I would also use that $70,000 to pay my programmers (Ethan Marcotte and Chris Coyier) and those who contribute to the creation of my website. I think a reasonable time frame for the creation of my website is two months; once those two months are finished and my site is open to the public, I will be paying my programmers $12,000 each for their work.
  
  With the remaining $30,000, I would like to actually expand my project to create a network of Mexico-made products produced in factories that have used child labor, that are then sold in the United States. I would like to create a network of where each of the products are sold. For example, if a popular store in America is buying goods from factories known to use child labor, a network could make that obvious. The amount of edges from the one store to the next would allow users to see just how much the United States contributes to the child labor problems in Mexico.
  
  My long-term goal, as mentioned throughout the grant proposal, is to create change in Mexico. I would like to see the child labor laws more strictly enforced, as well as children’s rights being better protected than they have been previously. There are serious problems with the lack of enforcement; children are losing their lives and/or being put into dangerous situations where they *could* lose their lives.
  
  Another important goal in the reduction of the use of child labor, is to educate the public about which products are being produced by child workers or factories that use child workers. If people learn that their favorite shirt that they own was produced by a 6 year old in Mexico, that can be a bit shocking, disappointing, sad, etc. My point being, it can cause many emotions, most of which I would assume to be negative. These emotions can be the foundation for change, which is the main goal of this project.
  
  As for the actual building of the website, Ethan will specifically be responsible for helping me create the physical layout of the site. For example, the two side tabs on the site that allow users to explore both the spatial map and the network. I'd also like Ethan to help me figure out how to design the opening page of my site. I'd like to use pictures of children in Mexico, those who have been exposed to child labor, maybe even take some quotes from them, if I can find them. I'd also like to create a tab, with Ethan's help, that will allow me to share the history of child labor and explain why I chose Mexico rather than the United States. I'd like to provide background, that way people understand why this is important.
  
  Chris will be specifically responsible for the color scheme and the visual effects. For my site, since it is about a sad topic, I would like to use dull colors, greys, blacks, and whites when discussing child labor and the negative effects that it has had on Mexican children. However, I think on the opening page of my site, I would like to use brighter colors, like reds, yellows, and greens, especially on the quotes, if I am able to find them. I would like those to stand out because they will provide a first-hand impact of child labor, and hopefully be impactful to those exploring my site.
  
  Of course, with all projects, there are some risks. The main risk of my project is that change may not occur as soon as I would like, if at all. However, I will be proud to educate people about what is happening. Educating the public is the first step in the change process. Another risk could be the time frame, although I feel like my time frame of two months is enough time to complete the site, especially because I have a very clear idea of what I would like the site to look like and the information I would like to include on my site. 
#### Final Products and Dissemination
  As previously mentioned, I would like to create a website to share my information with the world. I would also ask if Ethan and Chris would be willing to share my project with their fans, whether on their websites or during a public speech; something to get the word out. Once my project has some attention, I could travel and give public speeches about the future of my project and what I wish to accomplish. As mentioned, 
  
  I would like to make my project accessible to all by printing out fliers and making some of my speeches and presentations free. I would like to be able to share my ideas with as many people as possible, whether poverty-stricken, physically disabled, or mentally handicap. I would like to give all people a chance to make a difference if they would like to do so. I think another way to make my project more accessible, specifically to those who are hearing impaired, would be to have sign language and oral interpreters at my speeches and presentations. for those who are sight impaired, I could create a flier or pamphlet in braille, which would allow those with sight impairments to be included in the creation of my project.
  
  Access to my website will also be free, however, I will be accepting donations, and those donations will go towards funding a project that is fighting for the rights of children and trying to more strictly enforce child labor laws in Mexico. I think I will include a "Contact Me" option on my site as well, for those who would like to reach out. Whether to schedule an event with me, to ask me questions, or simply to communicate with like-minded projects similar to mine.
## Biographies
  Ethan Marcotte is famous programmer. He is most known for his creation of "responsive web design". He has written two books, *Responsive Web Design* and *Responsive Design: Patterns and Principles* about this work. He has worked with many well-known companies including; Google, The Today Show, eBay, and *New York Magazine*, just to name a few. Considering Ethan coined the term "responsive web design", it is obvious he would be the best one to hire to complete my project.
  
  Chris Coyier is a world known programmer. He is most famous for his work in Cascade Styling Sheet programming and even created a site dedicated to it. He is also the co-founder of *CodePen*, which can be described as Facebook for programmers. It allows people to write in all types of coding languages, collect languages, post jobs, and more. I think Chris' established identity in programming will be helpful when designing my site. He could not only bring publicity to it, but he created CSS programming, which is a powerful feat in the world of computers, he is the best of the best. Also, he could help guide me as I am creating my network, making sure that I am using the correct coding language and the correct set up.

## Appendices
Arnold, Taylor, Lauren Tilton, Laura Wexler. "Photogrammar." Accessed November 30, 2018. http://photogrammar.org/map/counties.

"Children's Rights: Mexico." Library of Congress. Accessed December 3, 2018. https://www.loc.gov/law/help/child-rights/mexico.php.

Coyier, Chris. "The Personal Website of Chris Coyier." Accessed December 5, 2018. https://chriscoyier.net

"Employment Rate Among Minors aged 5 to 17 in Mexico in 2015 and 2017." Statista. Accessed December 10, 2018. https://www.statista.com/statistics/713532/employment-rate-minors-in-mexico.

"Kids at Work: there are 3.6 million aged 5-17 in Mexico." Mexico News Daily. Accessed December 10, 2018. https://mexiconewsdaily.com/news/kids-at-work-there-are-3-6-million-in-mexico.

Marcotte, Ethan. "Ethan Marcotte." Last modified 2018. https://ethanmarcotte.com.

Nelson, Robert., Edward L. Ayers, Justin Madron, Nathaniel Ayers, Scott Nesbit. "American Panorama." Accessed November 30, 2018. http://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama.

Nikola, Lisa. "Study: Mexico to Blame for Nearly Half of Child Labor in Latin America." Accessed December 10, 2018. http://www.humanosphere.org/human-rights/2017/06/study-mexico-to-blame-for-nearly-half-of-child-labor-in-latin-america.

Orraca, Pedro. "Child Labor and its causes in Mexico." Accessed December 3, 2018. https://probdes.iiec.unam.mx/en/revistas/v45n178/body/v45n178a5_1.php.

"The 2018 List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor." U.S. Department of Labor. Accessed December 1, 2018. https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ilab/ListofGoods.pdf.
